- [Instructor] Now let us dive into what is a GET request.
A GET request as we said is a question
from the client to the server to get
or retrieve information for the user.
And that information could either be a text file
or it could be a PDF or a Word document
or it could be an audio or a video
or even for that matter an entire HTML content.
Now, when you make a GET request,
you can send data along with it
and the data that is sent out is always in the form
of a query string which is exposed or visible in the URL,
which is why GET request is considered to be
an insecure request.
Moreover, the data that is sent along
in a GET request is of limited size.
The max is eight KB, of course, with a few caveats
because that would depend upon the browser
and the server configuration.
GET request is an idempotent request.
What it essentially means that whenever you access
the URL pattern of Servlet and make a GET request
you are basically going to get information.
So it is not going to change anything on the server side.
If you take the same URL and hit a fortnight later,
or maybe a month down the line
you're still going to get the refresh content for that URL.
So nothing is changing on the server side
even if you hit the same request again and again.
These kind of requests are called idempotent requests
and GET is one of them.
Now let us understand how do you
implement a GET request inside your application.
I have created package under my source folder com.test
under which I have created another folder
specifically reserved for my Servlet classes.
Now under that I'm going to make a class
and let's label it as GETServlet itself.
Now this class needs to be equipped
with all the facilities of being a Servlet.
For that, I'm going to extend
the HTTP Servlet class into it.
The question is, why are we extending
the HTTP Servlet class?
So let's take a look at that.
Let's take a look at HTTP Servlet API Hierarchy.
It all starts off with a Servlet interface.
Down there you have an abstract class with Generic Servlet.
Now Servlet has got all the methods declared
for implementing a web application.
Generic Servlet, however, is that kind of an abstract
class which will help you design a protocol
independent application.
It could be any protocol
that you want to implement for an app.
HTTP Servlet on the other hand, has been designed
specifically to implement HTTP based applications.
So this is how the overall hierarchy looks like.
The focal point of discussion in this course
is building a web application using HTTP protocol,
which is why we are going with HTTP Servlet class.
Additionally, there are a couple of other APIs
that we need to check, Servlet Request and Servlet Response.
We know that the entire communication
between the client and the server is an exchange
of requests and responses.
To represent those, there are objects designated
under the Servlet API hierarchy,
Servlet request and Servlet response.
But again, theses are those protocol
independent entities and then down there
we have HTTP Servlet request and HTTP Servlet response,
which are going to be specifically
for our HTTP based applications.
All these enitities, the Servlet, generic Servlet
HTTP Servlet, come from the Java extra Servlet
package or the Java extra Servlet.HTTP package.
So now let's go back to our Eclipse
and we are implementing the HTTP Servlet Class
out here as apparent.
Now, every request that is made from the client
to the server, is always going to have a
corresponding method inside HTTP Servlet.
For example, right now we are looking at the GET request.
So the method for it is doget.
You just have to generate that and it'll come out
on its own in any IDE.
Doget looks like this, it has got the HTTP request
and the responses parameters.
Obviously because it is going to do the processing
for the request and response.
And then it could possibly throw you a Servlet exception
in case there are any errors encountered
with respect to Servlet.
And whenever you write a response
from this Servlet back to the client,
then it's an IO operation.
So if anything goes wrong there,
then it could possibly throw you an IO exception.
Let us get rid of all the parent calls.
We do not want that, we want our own implementation
in this doget.
So what we're going to do is,
we're going to construct a small HTML response.
Like this, in the form of a string.
So let me code some HTML elements here.
I'm going to say, HTML parent start and end tag.
And let's write a simple header
which will say that it gives a message to the user.
So, welcome to Servlets.
And I'm going to end that h3 element.
So my HTML response is ready with me.
What I now want to do is,
take this HTML response back to the client.
So I want to write it there.
For that, I need a pin.
Now that pin will be retrieved from this response object.
So on the response object I have an API
which is called getWriter.
This is going to return me a print writer reference.
Print Writer is an API under the Java IO package
which will help you to exclusively
write response on a webpage.
So I'm going to do that.
And then, I can just invoke the write API on it,
and stuff that HTML response in it as an argument.
And I am done.
So now whenever this servlet executes,
this HTML response in the form a string
is going to be written back onto the webpage.
On the web client, which is a browser,
it's going to be interpreted as HTML code
and I'll get this header displayed.
The next step that we have to do is,
we have to configure this servlet.
So let's go to the web XML, and configure the servlet.
For this you require a couple of tags.
The first one is the servlet tag.
Under which you have another tag called servlet-name.
Servlet-name is basically a logical name
that you wish to give, which is of your choice.
So let's say I'm going to call it GetServlet.
After that, the other tag to define is servlet-class.
Which is the fully qualified class name
of that servlet class that we used just now.
So I'm going to state that information
out there in that tag.
Right.
After we do this, there's another tag that you're to define
which is called servlet-mapping.
Now under this, you have a couple of other tags.
Let's see that.
There's a servlet-name.
Now this servlet-name is supposed to be having
exactly the same value that you've already given
under the servlet tag.
It's supposed to be the same and I'll tell you why
in the later part of this discussion.
The other tag that you're to define is url-pattern.
Which is a unique URL pattern identifying this servlet.
And it always relative to that ward structure
that we've seen earlier.
So I'm just going to say slash get servlet.
So this is what the configuration is for the servlet.
If you go down this file,
there is another servlet configuration
that I've done for the HomeServlet class.
And I've also added a HomeServlet.java file
under the servlets folder.
You are free to ignore it,
we discuss it in the later part of this course.
So now let's go ahead and run this project.
And check out our changes.
Yeah so this is how it looks like.
Let me take this URL,
go to a browser, and open it up fresh.
So this is the landing page of my application.
Now if I want to access that get servlet,
I need to append the URL pattern of that servlet.
So I'm going to do that quickly.
I'm going to say get servlet.
And there we are.
We get that header displayed as a part of the response
that we have written out of that servlet.
So this is basically how the get servlet works.
Let us look at a couple of other things.
We have done the entire servlet configuration via XML,
however web module 3.0 version
allows you to do the configuration via annotations.
Annotations are always placed inside a class
so this is how it look like.
You just have to say adderate,
webservlet, which is this annotation.
And in a pair of round brackets
you will have to define the URL pattern for this servlet.
Which was this for us.
So basically you either do the annotation configuration,
or you could do the XML configuration.
Choice is yours, it's completely left to the project
that you're implementing.
Where it is dictated, which configuration approach
you're going to adopt.
Let's also see one more thing.
Now that we've hit this URL on our browser,
let's see how do you send data
with a GET request?
So as I said, it is going to be
in the form of a query string.
And that looks like this.
There's a question mark,
and then the data is going to be
in the form of key and value.
The question mark is a separator
to understand that the rest of the portion
is the data plus.
Right, so name equal to Hplus.
Name is the key, and Hplus is the value.
Now, if you want to retrieve this data
inside your servlet, how do we do it?
Let's come back to the code.
This is my GetServlet.
Let's come here and now on line number 15,
I'm going to add the code which will fetch that data.
So let's take the request object
and invoke an API on it which is called getParameter.
We need to feed the name of that parameter
which is in our case name of course.
Let's end it with semicolon
and this is going to return me something of type string.
So I'm going to fetch it in a string variable.
Once this is done, let's also do one more thing.
Let's go ahead and write out this value
as a part of the response.
So on line number 18
where I'm writing out to find a response,
I can just go ahead, put a space,
and then append the value to it
to understand whether we are really getting the data or not.
Alright, so let's quickly run this project again.
And let's go back to the browser.
And now we're going to hit the request with this data.
So when I do that,
you see I got the response parameter written out.
So in order to fetch the data of the request,
you need to use request or get parameter.
Key value is how you specify the information.
And this entire thing is called query string.
In the next video we're going to implement
the get request for our Hplus boat application
for the search use case.